>> Peter: Hello, I'm Peter Edburg, and I'm going to give you
just a brief introduction to the presentation before we get
into the actual meat of the presentation.
SO what we're talking about here are
the core internationalization services
that are used by both Cocoa and Carbon.
And these consist of elements in several different
layers, part of several different frameworks.
This is designated by the yellow in the slide.
And they extend all the way from
core foundation up through Carbon.
Now AppKit is sitting on top of all of this.
It actually uses some of the internationalization
services from Carbon.
And so if you're a Cocoa developer and you
want standard internationalization behavior,
you get that by default from Cocoa applications.
If you want something that's beyond standard
behavior, or if you're a Carbon developer,
then you may need to call these services directly
and it's for you that we're directing this session.
Now we're not talking about all the pieces in all the
frameworks, we're really focusing on a couple of areas.
One are the internationalization services
at the CF, or core foundation, layer.
That's the bottom part of the diagram.
And we're also going to be speaking a little bit
about some of the services in the Carbon layer.
The services in the core services layer are mostly
deprecated and we'll be talking about that in a minute.
And the ones in the application services
layer are mostly about text layout
and those are covered in the core text session later today.
Okay, so what we're going to be focusing
on are the modern services.
And what do we mean by modern?
Well, there are two key aspects of these.
One is that they use Unicode and another
is that they are available in 64-bit.
There are some other services and we're going to be
providing some guidelines on how to shift away
from using the deprecated services
like the script manager and so on.
Now what are the important reasons for doing this?
Well, of course, one of the key issues
is that you can use Unicode text.
And this is not just so that you can display
(inaudible) form or some more obscure scripts in Unicode.
Unicode text actually provides a lot of
characters for East Asian languages, for example,
that were not available in the legacy Mac encodings.
It also means that all characters are always available.
In the Mac encoding, for example, some characters, and
not necessarily ones associated with specific languages
or scripts, were only available in certain context.
For example, the registered sign was in
MacRoman, but it was not in MacJapanese.
So if you happened to be drawing text
with MacJapanese, you didn't have that.
The contoured integral is in MacJapanese, not in MacRoman.
And these are not specifically
things you think of as associated
with either Japanese or the Western European languages.
Another big advantage for using the modern services
that we'll be focusing on is it gives you access
to more languages and localees and it also gives you
a more standard way of designating those languages
and localees using the language tagging
facilities described by BCP 47.
Of course another reason for using the modern APIs is
there they ones that we're focusing development on.
They work better, we're fixing more bugs in them, they also
support the new system initiatives that you've heard about,
so 64-bit and resolution independence and so on.
Now there are some cases where we haven't completely filled
in all the functionality that you might need with one
of our modern APIs that we're focusing on.
In some cases we have some transitional
APIs that fill these gaps.
And these transitional APIs typically do
support Unicode, but they may not, for example,
represent strings using CS strings and so on.
Okay, now I'm not going to go through
this diagram in great detail.
You'll get a copy of this later.
But this is just to give you a sense
of what that things are in which category.
What's deprecated, transitional and modern?
And so for example, for the text utilities area,
what's deprecated is certainly the script manager
and the legacy encodings associated
with it, the old international
and text utilities, language analysis manager and so on.
In the modern category we have a lot of
services at the core foundation layer.
And you'll be hearing about those, CFlocalee,
CFCalendar, CFDateFormatter, and so on.
Now an example of something that's in the
transitional category would be use of Unicode utilities
to get a collation key if you wanted to do optimized sorting
and Deborah will be describing a
little bit more about that later.
That's something we haven't got
available in the CF Domain at this point.
Okay. So the topics that we're going to be
covering in this presentation are these.
The three middle categories on this slide
are things that are all new for Leopard.
And the first and last topics also are areas in
which we've made some enhancements for Leopard.
Anyway, now to move into the media presentation, I'd
like to bring up Deborah Goldsmith who's going to talk to you
about the text utilities, international
formatting and so on.
Deborah plays many roles at Apple.
Deborah is the representative to Unicode and is the, I guess
Vice Chair of the CLDR Technical Committee and involved
with ICU, is also on the ICU board and
sort of the person who knows the most
about how the internationalization
pieces at Apple fit together.
So, with that, Deborah.
Thanks.
>> Deborah: Thank you Peter.
( Applause )
>> Deborah: Okay.
So we're going to talk a little bit about the modern APIs
that you can use to process text in your application.
Now many of these APIs appeared in
Tiger and some even before that.
So this is going to go very quickly.
It's going to be part review and
in a few places introduction
to some new features that are coming in Leopard.
So before we start talking about the APIs, we
need to talk about what the APIs deal with.
On the old world side for the script manager,
we have things like MacRoman and MacJapanese,
which are the legacy character encodings.
In the new world, all of the new APIs use Unicode.
So if you haven't already transitioned your application
to Unicode, that's what you should be focusing on.
The script manager used ScriptCodes, RegionCodes,
things like that to represent localees or languages.
In the modern world we have CFLocale, CFStringEncoding
to denote legacy encodings and CFCharacterSet
to keep track of sets of character or repertoires.
With the script manager legacy
encodings you use Pascal or C Strings.
In the modern world we use CFString or
its toll free bridged equivalent NSString.
And the API sets you used in the Mac OS 9 and Script
Manager world are the Script Manager, Text Utilities,
Date/Time Measurement Utilities and so on, and those are
replaced by the core foundation API sets that you see here.
So moving right along, we'll go
through a number of scenarios.
These don't cover all of the APIs by any means,
but it's just to give you an idea of
how to move your application forward.
So if you are interested in getting locale data, things
like the current currency symbol or localized decimal point
or what have you, you might call GetScriptVariable
or GetScriptManagerVariable.
Those are now deprecated.
And there are several API sets that
you can use as the modern equivalent.
For anything that has to do with locale data,
the place you start is CFLocaleCopyCurrent,
which gives you a copy of the user's current locale settings.
In order to disassemble that, or put it back together,
there's CFLocaleCreateComponentsFromLocaleIdentifier,
which lets you pick out the pieces of the locale ID.
And there's another API for putting it back together.
You can use CFLocaleGetValue to get
particular attributes of the locale.
And you could use CopyDisplayNameForPropertyValue
to get a localized name.
and we'll give a little example using that.
So say we want to get the name of the user's primary
language, the user's most preferred language in Polish.
Well, we can use CFLocaleCopyPreferredLanguages,
which is actually a new API in Leopard.
It returns an array, which is the list of the user's
language preferences from most preferred to least preferred.
We then get the first element of that array,
which is the user's most preferred language.
Then we need a Polish locale.
Now the user may not have their locale set to
Polish, so since we want Polish in particular,
we'll create one, instead of using CFLocaleCopyCurrent.
We create a Polish locale and then we call
CFLocaleCopyDisplayNameForPropertyValue.
That's a mouthful.
And we pass our Polish locale.
And we say we want the localized version of the
locale identifier and then we pass in the language.
Now why do we say locale identifier
instead of a language identifier?
Well you can see the reason below.
Because a language tag doesn't just consist
of a language, it can also have a script code
and possibly other things associated with it.
In this case, the users primary
language is Simplified Chinese,
which is denoted by the language tag and the scripts tag.
And the result in Polish is shown below.
And the English equivalent of that
is Chinese in Simplified Han.
Okay, here's another thing that you
might need to do in your application.
You might need to get information about characters.
Now in the script manager world you would
have used CharacterType to do that.
And there are several replacements in the modern API set.
First of all, CFCharacterSet, in addition to
letting you create your own sets of characters,
lets you get predefined sets that represents various
different kinds of characters like uppercase
or lowercase or digits or what have you.
In addition there are a few things
you can't do yet with core foundation
like get nonbinary properties of a character.
Like, for example, a decimal digit, what is
the value of that digit zero through nine?
So in this case we're going to test a particular
character to see whether it is a decimal digit.
We call CFCharacterSetGetPredefined to
get the predefined set of decimal digits
and then we can use
CFCharacterSetIsLongCharacterMember
to test a particular character for membership in that set.
And then you could go on to do other things such as
get the actual value using UCGetCharProperty if,
for example, you want to scan a number.
Another scenario is sorting text
strings, or searching through them.
The script manager had StringOrder and TextOrder for
that, and there's a large set of APIs that replace that,
which not all of which are listed here, we'll just go
through a few examples to give you some of the flavor
of how you do things with core foundation.
You can use CFStringCompare to compare
two strings with various options.
There's CFStringFind for finding
a string within another string.
And there's also a find and replace
option that works on mutable strings.
Sorry, find and replace API.
And if you're looking for a particular character in a
CFString, like say you want to find the next white space,
you can use CFStringFindCharacterFromSet, you can
call CFCharacterSet and get the predefined character set
of all white space and then use that to scan
through a string looking for the next one.
Now we have one API here that's in the
transitional set and that's UCGetCollationKey.
And let me explain what you might want to use that for.
If you're sorting a large set of strings, you're
going to be comparing strings more than once
because the fastest sorting algorithms
now require N login operations.
Now if you're doing a localized
comparison, one of the expensive parts
of that comparison is looking up
the localized ordering information.
And that's, the technical term for that is
developing a string of collation elements.
What a collation key lets you do is do that work up front
and get a binary string that's much faster to compare.
So if you're doing a sort or other large operation
where you're going to comparing strings multiple times,
this lets you amortize that localized information up
front and that'll speed up your sorting operation.
Another thing you might need to do is to
convert strings from uppercase or lowercase.
And CFString has a variety of modern
APIs that you can use to do that.
You can convert to uppercase or lowercase, as you could
with the script manager, but you can also do capitalization,
which converts the first character
of each word to uppercase.
Now you may notice that these APIs all pass the locale
and you might wonder why you need
that for uppercase and lowercase.
And the answer is that the rules for
converting between upper and lowercase vary
from language to language and country to country.
For example, the rules for Turkish are
not the same as the rules for English.
So if you're doing this to a string that
is going to be displayed to an end user,
you're going to want to pass the locale
into make sure that it's done properly.
Another operation that applies to Unicode that wasn't
necessary in the script manager world is normalization.
Now as you may be aware, Unicode can have multiple
ways of representing the same character sequence.
For example, an E with an acute accent can
be represented either as a precomposed form,
E with an acute accent as one character, or an
E based character with a combining acute accent.
And what CF normalize string does is let you convert
between those two forms because different systems
and different applications have a
preference for one form or the other.
For example on the Internet or on Windows,
you'll typically prefer the precomposed form
which is a normalization form C, NFC.
But HFS plus disk volumes prefer file
names in the decomposed form, NFD.
And there's a few subtleties there,
but I'm not going to go into them now.
Something else you might need to do in your
application is perform transformations on your text
and the script manager had a few of those.
You could strip the diacritics off or you could
transliterate text to Roman from other scripts.
And CFString has a very powerful API that lets you do
those transformations and more called CFStringTransform.
It can strip diacritics and this is
actually a new operation in Leopard.
In Tiger we had an operation for stripping combining marks,
which is a little bit more enthusiastic
than stripping diacritics.
So now we have just stripping diacritics.
It also support transformations to Latin, but actually
you don't want to use that if your application is running
on Leopard because starting in Leopard we have CFStringTokenizer,
which does a much more detailed analysis of text
and looks at grammatical information in
dictionaries and so on to convert text to Latin.
So it does much better job with things like
Japanese or Chinese than CFStringTransform can do.
So if you're running on Leopard,
use CFStringTokenizer instead
and Kida-san is going to be talking
about that in a few minutes.
However, if you need to do other kinds of
transformations, CFStringTransform is your API.
It also does bidirectional transformations,
which CFStringTokenizer doesn't do.
So if, for example, you can go back and forth between
Latin script and Hiragana or between Hiragana
and Katakana, you can do things like convert
non-ASCII characters to numeric escape codes.
And something that you can do that you could actually
do in Tiger, but we're supporting it formally
for the first time now, is you can pass any
transformation ID that's supported by the ICU library
to CFStringTransform and it will do it, in addition
to the predefined ones that we've supplied in the past.
So in this case, we're using the Half-
width-Fullwidth transform from ICU,
which converts halfwidth to fullwidth characters.
But we don't want to do that to the Latin characters in
our string, we just want to do it to the Katakana,
so we use a transform that has a Katakana
filter and the result is, on the right,
you can see that the Katakana characters become
fullwidth, but the Latin characters are left alone.
CFStringTransform can do lots more things
and you can read about it in the documentation.
Well, in addition to looking at strings and
transforming them, you also need to do basic operations
like replace parts of them or move bytes around.
In the past you would have used Munger
or ReplaceText, but in the modern world,
CFString has a variety of APIs you can call instead.
You can replace a range of a string with another string.
You can create a string with a format string, which
is very similar to printf. you can trim a string
from the beginning and end of another string.
So for example you can remove comments
or indicators or add comment indicators.
And there's a more specialized version of that,
which removes white space characters
from the beginnings or ends of strings.
And again, there's more APIs than
we have time to go into here.
You can read the documentation to find out about it.
If you're just moving bytes around and they're not
Unicode characters, then you can just use memmove
and similar APIs from the standard C library.
Okay. Well now we start to get into some
of the more complicated aspects of Unicode.
You might thing since Unicode is 16-bits wide, that
it's just like a wide version of ASCII, and it isn't.
it requires a little bit more of
sophistication in handling than that.
So in the past, you had to user CharacterByteType to make
sure that for a double byte character set like MacJapanese
or Mac Simplified Chinese, you were not
truncating the character in the middle.
Well, Unicode is not a multi byte
encoding, but you can still have more
than one code point used to represent
and end user character.
For example, the example I gave earlier about an
E character followed by a combining acute accent,
you don't want a break in the middle of that.
So suppose you're inserting something like an
ellipses, if you don't pay attention to the boundaries
of composing character sequence, you could get
something like the first example on the bottom
where you insert the ellipses in between
the base character and the accent.
And that's not the result you want.
Instead you can use
CFStringGetRangeOfComposedCharactersAtIndex,
and what that will do is it will take the index you
give it and it will give you the range on either side
of that index, of the composing character sequence.
And you don't want a break in the middle of that.
So if you use that, in this example, you'd start
with an arbitrary index and then you say, okay,
I want to put the break at the end of that range.
And then you get the second example
we have here where you have the E
with it's acute accent is okay and
then it's followed by the ellipses.
Speaking of that particular example of inserting
an ellipsis in order to truncate a string,
you actually don't have to do that yourself.
The script manager had APIs for that
and we have modern equivalents also.
If you're using core text, you don't even have to truncate
the string in memory, you can pass a certain set of tags
when you're rendering and core text will truncate the string
for you while leaving your string and memory untouched.
You just tell it how wide you want it to be and it will
do the right thing Unicode wise and put the ellipses
in the right place when it's actually drawing the string.
And there's, if you're still using ATSUI,
there's similar tags for (inaudible).
If you actually do want to truncate the string
in storage, you can call TruncateThemeText,
which is available as part of the appearance manager.
Another thing that you need to do in
application, for example, is handle double clicks,
or do whole word search, or handle word wrapping.
And it turns out that word boundaries and
line boundaries are not quite the same thing.
That's why the script manager had two separate APIs.
It had find word break and style line break.
And we'll find out a little bit more about
that later in Kida-san's presentation.
For Unicode text we've had UCFindTextBreak,
but new in Leopard we have CFStringTokenizer,
and CFStringTokenizer actually is now the preferred
API for looking for word, line or sentence boundaries.
If you're looking for cluster boundaries for things like
handling arrow keys, again, you can use
CFStringGetRangeOfComposedCharactersAtIndex,
which we just discussed.
Okay, moving along to handling locale information.
One thing you need to do in a localized way for
the end user is format and parse dates and times.
So the script manager had a long list of
APIs for doing that, too long to list here,
but those are all replaced by CFDateFormatter.
The model for CFDateFormatter is very simple.
You create an object, a CFDateFormatter object
that formats dates or parses dates the way you want
and then you can use that object to convert a CFAbsoluteTime
to a string or convert a string to a CFAbsoluteTime.
You can also set properties on the object that lets
you control the way that it does those operations.
So I have a quick example here.
We'll create a CFDateFormatter
object, and we use the current locale.
Now if you've used core foundation before, you'll
notice that I'm leaking the current locale here,
but that's just for purposes of this example.
You'd keep track of it and do a CFRelease on it later.
I'm asking for the LongDateStyle and the
LongTimeStyle and then I set a property
on the formatter object saying that I want lenient parsing.
And then I call CFDateFormatterGetAbsoluteTimeFromString
and the string I'm giving is January 1, 2001,
12 AM, GMT, and it so happens that that's the origin
for CFAbsoluteTime so the answer I get is zero.
Sometimes you need to do more with
dates than just parse or format them.
Sometimes you need to do calendar calculations, and since
Tiger we've had CFCalendar, which replaces a long list
of script manager APIs that are not deprecated, or
actually have been deprecated for some time now.
And again, we're going through this very quickly.
CFCalendar lets you go between a list of calendar
components, like the year, month, day, hour, minute,
second, and compose those into an AbsoluteTime.
Or go in the other direction, you
can also do arithmetic on dates.
Say, for example, I want to take CFCalendar that represents
today and I want to say what's the date that corresponds
to 10 months from now, I can add 10 months to that date
and it will do all the calendrical calculations correctly.
CFCalendar also supports non-Gregorian calendars, which
is something that we've supported in the OS since Tiger,
so we would like it if your application
supported non-Gregorian calendars as well.
Very similar to dates and times, you also need
to format and scan numbers in your application,
and it's very analogous to the way dates and times work.
You create a number format or object.
You can use it to convert to and from a string.
And you can set properties on that formatter
that control the way it does it's work.
In this case, you can actually set the format pattern string
if you want to use a particular number format as opposed
to using the number format that
you get from the user's locale.
So what we're doing here is we're creating a number
formatter, again with the current locale and again,
leaking the current locale and we're
asking for the currency style.
CFNumberFormatter supports a variety of styles.
It supports currencies, plain numbers,
floating point numbers and percent.
In this case, we're taking the number
1,992 and we're formatting it as currency.
And another thing that's different from CFDateFormatter
is you'll notice we have to pass the type
of the number, and in this case it's a double.
CFNumberFormatter supports converting to and from
various binary formats, not just doubles and floats,
but also integers as well and also CFNumbers.
In this case, we have the Russian locale selected, so we get
an amount formatted in Rubles, which is shown at the bottom.
Okay. That ends our whirlwind tour of text management APIs,
and I hope you're not too dizzy from
that because we went very quickly.
And now I'm going to turn things over to Yasuo Kida,
who's the manager of our Tokyo OS Engineering Group.
Kida-san.
>> Thank you, Deborah.
I'm Yasuo Kida, the manager of OS Engineering in Tokyo.
I'm actually living here, managing Tokyo engineering team.
I'll talk about CFStringTokenizer.
It is a text segmentation API that's new to Leopard.
Let's see what it is.
It can tokenize a given string
into a word, sentences or paragraphs.
Not only can it tokenize languages that has
explicit word boundary marks, like this,
it also talk nice languages like Japanese
and Chinese into natural word boundaries.
It can do so by utilizing a technology
called morphological analysis.
By utilizing the morphological analysis, it can give
Latin transcription for not only for alphabetic language
like Arabic or Indic, it
can provide Latin transcription
for ideographic languages like Japanese and Chinese.
Look at those two kanjis that are highlighted.
Those are the same kanji, but
have different pronunciation.
And CFStringTokenizer can provide correct Latin
transcription based on the context of the text.
Sometimes a word consists of multiple
words, this is called compounds.
The CFStringTokenizer can break compounds such as
German noun compounds and look at the first compound
of sub token is different from the original token.
And it can also break CamelCase
and words with numbers into symbols.
So previous examples, you are interested in
tokens that are surrounded by boundaries,
but there are cases you are interested in boundaries itself.
So one of those cases, line breaking
opportunity, finding line breaking opportunities.
Other case is finding word break,
which is used for double click range.
For some languages, word breaking and
line breaking opportunities are similar,
like shown in the above example.
Some other languages, those are completely different.
Lastly, it has an API that does language identification.
It identifies the language of a given text, like this.
Here is a relationship with other similar APIs.
So first of all, do not use language analysis
framework, find word break, style line break,
focal tokenization, or finding text breaks.
And do not use TransliterateText for Latin transcription.
Instead use CFStringTokenizer for
tokenization in Latin transcription.
Use CFStringTransformation for other
transcriptions like Deborah mentioned.
So let me show you how it works.
( Silence. )
>> Okay.
( Silence )
>> So here you have a bunch of text.
This is the desktop application.
So let's drag and drop this text into a text field.
So why do you think this language is?
Let's click on identify language button.
And this is Simplified Chinese.
And let me do the tokenization.
It can tokenize text into pieces.
Now let's see.
And this is Latin transcription.
Another example is this one.
I cannot read this language.
Let's try identifying the language.
This is German.
And notice that, not only I identify the language, I set
the spelling Czechker to the language, which is identified.
And you see the spelling Czechker now works
correctly on this text compared with this state.
And it can tokenize the German compounds into pieces.
Look at this word.
It's a single word in the original text.
How about this one?
What language this is?
This is French.
How about this one?
This is the last one.
( Silence )
>> This is Dutch.
And this is an example I like.
( Silence )
>> This is a mixture of some Latin
language and some Kanji.
This is in German and let's get the Latin transcription.
You can get the Latin transcription
correctly even for the Japanese part.
( Silence )
>> Let's get back to the presentation screen, please.
Thank you.
So let's see how you program it.
So for most of the purposes of language identification,
you first create the tokenizer by
calling CFStringTokenizerCreate.
And for this word tokenization case, you
specify KCFStringTokenizerUnitWord to it.
And then you form iterator by calling
CFStringTokenizerAdvanceToNextToken
and you iterate while it is returning non zero body.
And you can access to the range of the current token.
So CFStringTokenizer API is playing a
lot of attention to memory allocation.
It is trying to reduce the need for the memory allocation
as much as possible during the iteration process.
You can add one API to it to do the Latin transcription.
You call CFStringTokenizerCopyCurrentTokenAttribute.
With CFStringTokenizerAttributeLatinTranscription,
which is pretty much the only attribute
that is currently supported to get the
Latin transcription for the current token.
And here is how you break compounds.
It's a little bit complicated, but the basic is similar.
First you create an array.
Because like I explained and mentioned earlier, there are
some cases that tokens are different from the original text.
So you need to be getting those into arrays of ranges.
And if the type says yeah, I have some tokens you
call CFStringTokenizerGetCurrentSubTokens
and get those sub tokens in the array.
Here's an example for finding a line breaking opportunities.
You create a tokenizer by specifying
KCFStringTokenizer, you need line break.
And instead of forming (inaudible), you
call CFStringTokenizerGoToTokenAtIndex
by providing a chapter index to it.
Usually you're not interested in getting
a series of tokens for entire text,
but you are interested in knowing text boundaries
surrounding your or near a particular chapter index.
The last thing you do is language identification.
Simple. One call.
You gave string and range.
If you gave a range of zero left of zero it reads
appropriate number of characters to recognize language.
So that was CFStringTokenizer.
Next I'll talk about the Dictionary Development Kit.
What is it?
In Tiger we released an application called Dictionary App.
It had US English dictionary and Thesaurus and that was it.
In Leopard we added the capability
for you to add dictionaries to it.
So this is what Dictionary Development Kit is for.
You can draw up dictionaries for Dictionary App.
Like regular dictionaries and thesaurus or bilingual dictionaries
like Thai and English or specialty dictionaries
like (inaudible) or technical, some technical area
or medical or you can draw up reference libraries
or glossaries, glossaries for in house usages.
It is HTML based, so very simple.
Each page is an HTML page.
And you can think of a dictionary as a
set of HTML pages targeted with terms.
It will use a rich set of terms you already know.
And it is in UTF-8 throughout, so it is
Unicode and it can support many languages.
Let's look at the source.
So Dictionary Development Kit defines
a few XML tags that surround
and encapsulate the concept of
the dictionary and each entry.
This is a document entity, dictionary, our root tag.
Inside the root tag you have entity tags and entry tags.
You have multiple entry tags in the dictionary.
And this is an entry tag that's
supposed to an entry called AirPort.
The ID is a unique identifier for the entry.
You would be using for linking between entries, for example.
You can add multiple indexes and here's your content.
Typically it starts with  tag like this.
And your content and let me add a link between entries.
In this cased it links to AirPort Extreme.
And we define the URI scheme that is
x-dictionary and you can add images.
It's HTML.
And you can actually add your own CSS
images etcetera and you provide info.plist,
you provide dictionary name and bundle identifier, etcetera.
And compile it into a dictionary.
You can a Dictionary Development Kit at the following
directory: /Developer/Extras/Dictionary Development Kit/
We are planning an Xcode version of it, but
that might become available to ADC website.
And let me compile a dictionary.
( Silence )
>> It is taking a long time.
>> Let me open it.
( Silence )
>> Hello. Oh yeah.
Phew.
( Silence )
>> So this is the source code for
the dictionary we just created.
It is rather small.
We need the Xcode.
( Whispering )
Okay, anyway.
This dictionary has two entries.
One is for AirPort the other for AirPort Express.
And like we created in the presentation, it
has a link to the other entry and an image.
So CD, and then we compile it to the project
dictionary, project directory and link.
And it will create a dictionary into the objects directory.
And let me copy it into the dictionaries folder.
If your library folder doesn't have
dictionary folder, you can create it.
And launch dictionary, viola.
This is your dictionary.
Let me type AirPort, it finds entry, it should.
Hello, yep.
So this is the title as we said and the
content and the link and the picture.
And you can click on the link then go to the other entry.
So it's that simple.
And thank you very much.
Let me introduce Mr. Michael Grady
to talk about Text Input API.
>> Mike: Thank you Kito-san for that.
Hello everybody.
We'll be discussing the state of
Text Input Sources in Leopard.
You've heard several times mentioned in this talk that the
script manager's deprecated and some parts of it are really,
really deprecated like the KeyScript API.
The reason is not just because those API are based
on the Mac script code, which is a deprecated notion.
But really they have not as a API been able to keep up with
the variety of text input sources available on Mac OS X.
What are examples of text input sources?
You see up here a text input menu.
It has a number of keyboard layouts, the US keyboard,
Arabic, Czech, and the Unicode text input keyboard layout
that we'll talk a little bit about later.
You also see some input methods.
And here you see some input modes that
belong to the Kotoeri input method.
( Speaking in foreign language )
Are three input modes that belong
to the input method and the grayed
out portion of the menu you see up here, Kotoeri.
There are additional input sources as well.
You'll see the character palette available at the
bottom of the menu and keyboard viewer palette.
These are all examples of text input sources that
the script manager could not really deal with.
So we're introducing a new API in Leopard to help you,
and modern API to help you control these input sources.
And we'll tie within nicely afterwards with a demo.
What are the things that you would expect
the text input source API to provide?
Well, of course accessing properties of an
input source, icon, localized name, and so forth.
Discovery on iterated mode to find input sources
that may or may not be enabled already by the user.
The current "state" of the user's configuration, and something
that simply could not be done with the script manager,
manipulation of the input sources from the background
and having them take effect in the foreground.
So let's get into that.
what is a text input source?
It's typed as a TISInputSourceRef.
It is registered with the CF runtime
as an instance of CFType.
And it's identified uniquely by TISInputSourceGetTypeID.
And that makes it a candidate to be used with
the normal polymorphic functions you'd expect,
CFRetain,CFRelease, and CFEqual.
Once you have a TISInputSourceRef
what can you do with it?
Well, the workhorse of the API is
accessing properties of an input source.
TISGetInputSourceProperty is shown
here being passed in input source.
In this case the current keyboard input source, as
you see at the top and we're querying a property
in this case its BundleID, very simple API, very powerful.
What are some of the properties
that you might be interested in?
we'll go over a set here.
Identification input sources have a unique InputSourceID.
For input methods and input modes that's very
straight forward, it's just a BundleID
and a concatenation with the ModeID.
For keyboard layouts it's important
that if you develop a keyboard layout
that you provide your own InputSourceID
keyboard layout should be bundle.key layouts.
And in the KL info dictionary that they usually contain
that's where you specify your unique InputSourceID.
Input sources also belong to categories.
That's a broad distinction between things like
KeyboardInputSources or PaletteInputSources.
There's a more fine grain distinction
between them by the input source type.
For example, something, maybe a keyboard layout,
a keyboard input method. In the case of palettes
that may be a character palette or a keyboard viewer.
Other static properties of input sources
would be whether it can be enabled.
Most input sources can be enabled, some cannot.
For example, an input method may provide a
private keyboard layout in its own bundle.
That is a text input source not enableable.
Things that can be enabled are not always selectable.
For example, we know that input modes of
an enabled input method can be selected
but the parent input method itself cannot
be selected while it can be enabled.
Input sources have, are associated with, languages they support.
For example the US keyboard layout could be used
to type not just English but French and Spanish.
So an input source will typically be associated with several
languages, the first of which is the intended language.
The intended language is also another property that you
should be specifying in your keyboard layouts bundle.
Keyboard layout input sources in particular
have keyboard layout data of the TIS
or the text input source API only makes available
access to the Unicode keyboard layout data, the uchar,
the Kkhar format is completely deprecated.
It's not accessible by either TIS API.
And this reminder also to, as you do provide your
keyboard layouts to make them bundled.key layouts.
Some nonstatic state of input sources might be
whether it's currently enabled or currently selected.
So you seen what we can do with the TISInputSourceRef,
what it is, but how do we get one in the first place?
Well we have a powerful iterator API
called TISCreateInputSourceList.
It's a very simple API.
It takes a filter, really a dictionary of
properties of property keys and values.
And it returns an array of text input
sources that match your criteria.
Another API is TISCopyInputSourceForLanguage.
This takes a language in the BCP 47
format, a language code such as would be returned
by a CF locale create language identifier from stream.
And it'll return the most recently used
text input source for that language
or whose intended language is what you specify.
And we'll discuss inconvenience functions
that also return TISInputSourceRefs.
Here's an example of the iterator API in action.
TISCreateInputSourceList is being passed
to filter, a dictionary of one key value pair.
In this case we're interested all input
sources whose category is palette input source.
We're interested in all palettes.
You'll note the second parameter to
TISInputSourceList is important.
In this case we're only interested in text input sources
that match the criteria that happen to be enabled currently.
There are times where you would want to
find input sources that are not yet enabled
by the user but are installed in the system.
So you pass through in that case to look through
all the installed input sources but you'll want
to exercise some care with the filter you pass in.
If your filter is too loose, not restrictive enough, you
may end up allocating memory for a whole bunch of objects
in your app's memory that you did not intend to use.
You see the second API we mentioned
TISCopyInputSourceForLanguage.
Again it takes a language code in BCP 47 format.
In this case the Czechk line which it'll
return the last used input source for Czechk.
I mentioned some convenience APIs as well for the
current state of the user's configuration.
You may be interested in the current keyboard input source.
Again this may not necessarily be a keyboard layout.
It could be an input method or an input mode.
The current input mode may not be Roman.
It may not be ASCII capable.
And that may be something you want.
What is the last used ASCII capable input source?
Keyboard input source, so we have
TISCopyCurrentASCIICapableKeyboardInputSource.
Neither of those need to be keyboard layouts and
you may really want the keyboard layout for yourself
or perhaps you want to retranslate key
events, changing modifier bits and so forth.
So you can get that through the
TISCopyCurrentKeyboardLayoutInputSource.
That input source may not be ASCII capable either.
So we have another accesser,
TISCopyCurrentASCIICapableKeyboardLayoutInputSource.
And in the case where an ASCII capable keyboard layout is
not actually enable by the user this will usually return
to where it was used in Mac buddy in the set
up system at the time you installed the system.
Here are the things you can do in the manipulation space.
You can enable input sources, disable them, you can
select usually any input source if it's selectable.
But you cannot de select a keyboard input source.
There's only one keyboard input source active
at a time so you can only select another one.
And the de selection is implicit in that case.
But you can deselect explicitly palette input sources.
And again there are things that could
not be done with the script manager.
That is selection, enabling, disabling
deselection from the background.
And that automatically takes effect in the foreground.
And so, we have two notifications that are dispatched
through the CF distributed notification
center, not the local center.
Have selected KeyboardInputSourceChanged
or EnableKeyboardInputSourceChanged.
These would be dispatched for example as a user enables
or disables input sources in the
internationalization press panel.
And so to show you how powerful these API are
we'll tie everything together with a nice demo
that Peter Edburg will be helping use with.
>> Peter: Hi, what we've got here,
thanks, what I've got here is app,
it's a bit of a cross between the international
preferences input menu pane and the text input menu.
And so just to illustrate the discovery or iteration,
basically it requested a list of all of the keyboard input,
all of the installed keyboard input sources in the system
and that's what the table source is displaying here.
in terms of properties, some of the properties,
and I should mention that everything that's being
done here is being done with public TIS API.
Some of the properties are being
displayed in the table view here.
for example is it ASCII capable what
the type is and icon and so on.
And to get additional properties I can select on
a row for example and I get the InputSourceID,
the BundleID if it's a bundled source, the
InputModeID if it's an input mode and the language codes.
And the language codes for key layouts we figure out
automatically from the repertoire of the key layout
and the ICU exemplar or the CLDR exemplar set.
So, for example for Czech, it's intended for
Czech but it can also be used to input a number
of other languages including German, English and so on.
There are notifications going back and forth.
So, for example if I, right now we haven't gotten
Czech as an enabled key layout but if I enable it here
for example it the text input menu
will reflect that and so on.
If I select it here in the text input
menu it shows up as selected here.
In terms of the current state, the
bottom four fields show the state
of the various convenience APIs that Mike was mentioning.
So, for example if I select US then US is our current
key layout, or keyboard input source, it's ASCII capable
of the Key layout and it's the ASCII capable key layout.
If I select say Russian, okay well
Russian is not ASCII capable
but it is the keyboard layout input source
and it's also the current key layout.
I can select, for example Romaji.
Romaji is ASCII capable okay so it shows up
as the ASCII capable input source and so on.
Let's see, and I think the only other thing I wanted to
illustrate is that the APIs that enabled manipulation
of input sources can operate in the background.
Let me just get rid of a few of these so it's,
so we don't have to go through many, so many.
I'm going to turn off some of the input methods here
and then go to this little facility that will cycle
through the enabled input sources in the background.
So you can see that the menu up there is changing and I'm
just going to be hitting the same key on the keyboard here.
So now we've got text edit in foreground,
my little test app here is working
in the background changing the input sources.
So there's Arabic, and Czech, and so on, anyway, French, okay.
And that's about it.
So that you can do with the TIS API. Thank you.
( Applause )
>> Mike: Thank you Peter.
And the rest of the talk will be considering
briefly the state of the Text Services Manager.
TSM, for short, is introducing a new
model for restricting input sources.
This was formerly done by using the super deprecated
KeyScript API restricting input source, the restriction,
restricting input sources means limiting the
set of text input sources available to the user
in the context of a particular text field for example.
So, we'll be considering that, and a brief
mention on some support in TSM Carbon events
for resolution independence, modern event
primary types, and the state of TSM and 64-bit.
So input source restriction, the KeyScript API had
a limitation or an inconvenience in that it required,
first of all it was global in scope,
at least in application scope.
And whenever you restrict this sort of input sources
for a particular text field you have to carefully undo
that before switching to another text field
so that the effects would not spill over.
But really the set of text input sources available
for text field are a property of that text field
and it should be encapsulated by the input
context, in this case the TSMDocument itself.
So, TSM is introducing two new TSMDocument properties,
the EnabledInputSourcesPropertyTag and that allows you
to specify an array of TISInputSourceRefs to which the
user should be restricted in the context of the text field.
And you can also specify a preferred
input source within that set
to be switched too the next time
that text field gets focused.
And again because they are properties of the
input context with the TSMDocument you can set it
at any time even at the creation of your text field.
Set it and forget it, let TSM do the gymnastics
of doing and undoing the restriction for you.
Now as the user's session, the user's
log in session goes on the user may
at various times enable different
input sources or disable some.
And you would want the set of enabled input sources to
which you restrict a particular context to reflect that.
So, you'll from time to time want to look for the
enabled keyboard input sources change notification
that is dispatched through the CF
distributed notification center.
Here's some examples of the new document properties in use.
We have the EnabledInputSourcesPropertyTag being set
for a particular TSMDocument or just passing in an array
of TISInputSourceRefs in the first example.
And then at a later time simply removing that
restriction with a TSMRemoveDocumentProperty API.
If you want to specify preferred input source
within a set of restricted input sources,
you have an example of the override
property tag being used for that.
Cocoa also has a similar notion.
While it doesn't expose the notion of a
TISInputSourceRef, it does allow you to restrict a set
of input sources available for a text field
using the SetAllowedInputSourceLocalees API.
And again instead of passing an array of
TISInputSourceRefs, you pass an array of language code
or language identifiers in BCP 47 format
or loGcale identifiers work as well.
And if at a later time if you want to
remove the restriction just pass nil.
By far the most common type of input source restriction
that you'll see used is the need
for Roman input or ASCII only input.
There's a convenience API TISCreateASCIICapableInputSourceList
that will return to you the entire set
of enabled ASCII capable input sources and
you can just pass that indirectly as the value
of the EnabledInputSourcePropertyTag.
And Cocoa has a similar notion with a constant
NSAllRomanInputSourcesLocaleIdentifiers
that you can pass directly to setAllowedInputSourceLocales.
TSM has modified a number of event parameters in
the current events that defines to the float types
where in the past there were a mixture of different
numeric types, typedFixed, and the typeSInt16, and so forth.
You can request any event parameter that's typed
as a float using typeCGFloat if you want.
And in that case you will get data that's 72 dpi by default.
But you can also, as shown in the example
below, request that event parameter
in using a coordinate space variant of the typeFloat.
So you see here we're asking for the ReplyLineHeight
which is unidimensional value but you may want
that in screen pixels instead of in 72 dpi.
And the same thing is done automatically by the Carbon event
manager, it does this coercion automatically independent
of what is actually in the Carbon unit for you.
And that applies to typeFloat, it
applies to points, typeHIPoint.
And so you have screen pixel variance of
typeHIPoint and also for typeHIRect.
TSM has also introduced our support
for a number of modern data types.
We, see here typeCTFontRef referring
to the CTFontRef data type,
CTGlyphInfoRef are also supported
in addition to CFAttributedStrings.
Now, an application may modernize to
use those types in the events it returns
but the input methods may not or vice versa.
So TSM solves this compatibility
problem with a promise mechanism
where it will promise one modern parameter
from the older parameters and vice versa.
So it automatically coerced one set of parameters to
or from the other based on how you request the data.
An example below we have the OffsetToPosevent.
You may return an ATS font and point
size and the input method may request
that information using the
kEventParamTextInputReplyCTFontRef.
And TSM will coerce that from the older data.
There's another example of coercing an attributed string
from Sintax and GlyphInfo and font array in the event.
And this works in both directions.
By now you've all heard that a part of Carbon,
the tool box, the part of the Carbon that deals
with user interface is not available in 64-bit
and that includes the Text Services Manager.
This would not normally be an issue for you because
the direction, of course is to go with Cocoa.
And Cocoa encapsulates all of the interaction
with the Text Services Manager anyway.
Of course if you're doing some heavy duty
customization of Cocoa, in particular a layout engines,
perhaps you want to do vertical text layout, you will need
to support interactions with input methods and so forth.
And that is doable by using the NSInputContext.
This was made public in Mac OS X 10.4.
Compliment based input methods are also not
supported in 64-bit so you'll be very interested
in deploying your input method for
64-bit using the input method kit.
There's a session a hands on session on the Input Method Kit
Friday morning after the lab that we'll be showing later on.
I believe that's session 577.
So in summary for my part of the talk it's a Unicode world.
Let's get off of the script manager, stop using KeyScripts,
we really need all the keyboard layout developers
or providers to switch to the uchar
and bundled .keylayouts.
We talked a little bit about the Cocoa support for
restriction of input sources allowed input source locale API
and a similar notion in TSM through the document properties.
Really you'll get the latest goodness by reading our headers
TextInputSources, TextServices, and CarbonEvents.
And again for input method deployment for
64-bit you'll really be interested
in the Input Method Kit session on Friday morning.
And a brief summary of everything we've talked about
this morning, again it's a Unicode world, be Unicode.
We talked about the CF modern API available
to replace the older deprecated functionality
in particular CSStringTokenizer
and the TextInputSources API.
Some contact information for your Evangelist Derek Horn.